doc/source/guide/in_depth/chambolle_pock_guide.rst, before:

.. _chambolle_pock_in_depth:

#####################
Chambolle-Pock solver
#####################

The `chambolle_pock_solver`, was introduced in 2011 by Chambolle and Pock in the paper `A first-order primal-dual algorithm for convex problems with applications to imaging
<https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00490826/document>`_.
It is a method for solving convex, yet non smooth problems of the form

.. math::
   
   min_{x \in X} F(K x) + G(x)

where :math:`K` is a linear `Operator` :math:`K : X -> Y` where :math:`X` and :math:`Y` are `LinearSpace`'s and :math:`G : X \mapsto [0, +\infty]` and :math:`F : Y \mapsto [0, +\infty]` are proper, convex, lower-semicontinuous functionals. For more information on the mathematics, please see :ref:`chambolle_pock`.

Using the chambolle-pock solver
===============================

There are several examples in the examples folder of odl, these include denoising, deblurring and tomography. There is also an example of using a diagonal pre-conditioner.

We will walk through the solution of a typical problem using the Chambolle-Pock solver. The problem we'll be looking at is the TV regularized denoising problem with a l2 data discrepancy term.

.. math::

   f(x) = \frac{1}{2} ||x - g||_2^2 + \lambda || |\nabla x| ||_1

With a positivity condition, enforced by

.. math::

   G(x) = {0 \text{ if } x \geq 0, \infty \text{ if } x < 0} ,

Here, :math:`g` denotes the image to denoise, :math:`||.||_2` the l2-norm, :math:`||.||_1` the l1-semi-norm, :math:`\nabla`  the spatial gradient, :math:`\lambda` the regularization
parameter, :math:`|.|` the point-wise magnitude across the vector components of :math:`\nabla x`.

To fit this into the chambolle-pock framework, we need to write :math:`f(x)` on the form :math:`F(Kx)` where :math:`F` is a convex functional and :math:`K` is a linear operator. The standard way of doing this is to let :math:`K` be a column vector of operators :math:`K = (I, \nabla)^T` with identity mapping :math:`I`. Thus

.. math::

   K(x) = [x, \nabla(x)]

With this choice, we can let 

.. math::
 
   F(\vec{x}) = F([x_1, x_2]) = ||x_1 - g||_2^2 + \lambda || | x_2 | ||_1

To implement this in ODL, we first need to decide on what spaces to solve the problem in. In this case, we want a L2 space on the square :math:`[0, 1] \times [0, 1]`. We chose 256 discretization points per axis:

.. code-block:: python

   space = odl.uniform_discr([0, 0], [100, 100], [256, 256])

We also need to generate some test data since this is part of the objective functional. We pick the modified Shepp-Logan phantom with 10% additive Gaussian noise.

.. code-block:: python
   orig = odl.util.shepp_logan(discr_space, modified=True)
   noisy = orig + odl.util.white_noise(discr_space) * 0.1

We now need to define the forward operator :math:`K`. We begin by its constituents:

.. code-block:: python

   I = odl.IdentityOperator(space)
   gradient = odl.Gradient(space, method='forward')

where we chose the 'forward' method for the gradient for numerical stability reasons. To create :math:`K`, we note that :math:`K` is a special case of a `BroadcastOperator`, an operator that broadcasts its argument to several sub-operators. Hence we may create :math:`K` by

.. code-block:: python

   K = odl.BroadcastOperator(I, gradient)

We can now proceed to the problem specification. The chambolle pock solver does not take the functionals themselves as arguments, instead it needs the proximal operators associated with them. ODL implements most common functionals such as L1, L2 and Kulback-Leibler distance. If you are interested in writing original proximal operators, see :ref:`proximal_operators` for a mathematical discussion.

In this case, we first create the l2 and l1 discreptancy terms

.. code-block:: python
   
   prox_convconj_l2 = odl.solvers.proximal_convexconjugate_l2(space, g=noisy)
   prox_convconj_l1 = odl.solvers.proximal_convexconjugate_l1(gradient.range, lam=1/30.0)

Note that :math:`\lambda` is actually part of the proximal operator. Finally, we need to combine these, similarly to how we combined operators to form :math:`K`

.. code-block:: python

   proximal_F = odl.solvers.combine_proximals([prox_convconj_l2,
                                               prox_convconj_l1])

We also select the proximal operator corresponding the positivity constraint

.. code-block:: python

   proximal_G = odl.solvers.proximal_nonnegativity(space)

Now that the problem is set up, we need to select some solver parameters. For chambolle-pock, there is one main rule that we can use: The product of the primal step :math:`\tau`, the dual step :math:`\sigma` and the squared operator norm :math:`||K||^2` has to be smaller than 1: :math:`\tau \sigma ||K||^2 < 1`. Except for this selecting :math:`\tau` and :math:`\sigma` is down to trial and error. Here we pick them equal:

.. code-block:: python
   
   op_norm = odl.power_method_opnorm(K, 5, xstart=noisy)
   tau = sigma = 1.0 / op_norm

Finally, we pick a starting point and run the algorithm:

.. code-block:: python
   x = op.domain.zero()   

   odl.solvers.chambolle_pock_solver(
       K, x, tau=tau, sigma=sigma, proximal_primal=proximal_G,
       proximal_dual=proximal_F, niter=20)

   orig.show('original')
   noisy.show('noisy')
   x.show('result')

Commit message:

DOC: improve doc of chambolle pock
* Style improvements
* Add result figures

doc/source/guide/in_depth/chambolle_pock_guide.rst, after:

.. _chambolle_pock_in_depth:

#####################
Chambolle-Pock solver
#####################

The `chambolle_pock_solver`, was introduced in 2011 by Chambolle and Pock in the paper `A first-order primal-dual algorithm for convex problems with applications to imaging
<https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00490826/document>`_.
It is a method for solving convex, yet non smooth problems of the form

.. math::
   
   min_{x \in X} F(K x) + G(x)

where :math:`K` is a linear `Operator` :math:`K : X -> Y` where :math:`X` and :math:`Y` are `LinearSpace`'s and :math:`G : X \mapsto [0, +\infty]` and :math:`F : Y \mapsto [0, +\infty]` are proper, convex, lower-semicontinuous functionals. For more information on the mathematics, please see :ref:`chambolle_pock`.

Using the Chambolle-Pock solver
===============================

There are several examples in the examples folder of ODL, these include denoising, deblurring and tomography. There is also an example of using a diagonal pre-conditioner.

We will walk through the solution of a typical problem using the Chambolle-Pock solver. The problem we'll be looking at is the TV regularized denoising problem with a l2 data discrepancy term.

.. math::

   f(x) = \frac{1}{2} ||x - g||_2^2 + \lambda || |\nabla x| ||_1

With a positivity condition, enforced by

.. math::

   G(x) = {0 \text{ if } x \geq 0, \infty \text{ if } x < 0} ,

Here, :math:`g` denotes the image to denoise, :math:`||.||_2` the l2-norm, :math:`||.||_1` the l1-semi-norm, :math:`\nabla`  the spatial gradient, :math:`\lambda` the regularization
parameter, :math:`|.|` the point-wise magnitude across the vector components of :math:`\nabla x`.

To fit this into the Chambolle-Pock framework, we need to write :math:`f(x)` on the form :math:`F(Kx)` where :math:`F` is a convex functional and :math:`K` is a linear operator. The standard way of doing this is to let :math:`K` be a vector of operators :math:`K = (I, \nabla)` with identity mapping :math:`I`. Thus

.. math::

   K(x) = [x, \nabla(x)]

With this choice, we can let 

.. math::
 
   F(\vec{x}) = F([x_1, x_2]) = ||x_1 - g||_2^2 + \lambda || \ | x_2 | \ ||_1

To implement this in ODL, we first need to decide on what spaces to solve the problem in. In this case, we want a L2 space on the square :math:`[0, 100] \times [0, 100]`. We chose 256 discretization points per axis:

.. code-block:: python

   space = odl.uniform_discr([0, 0], [100, 100], [256, 256])

We also need to generate some test data since this is part of the objective functional. We pick the modified Shepp-Logan phantom with 10% additive Gaussian noise.

.. code-block:: python

   orig = odl.util.shepp_logan(space, modified=True)
   noisy = orig + odl.util.white_noise(space) * 0.1

We now need to define the forward operator :math:`K`. We begin by its constituents:

.. code-block:: python

   I = odl.IdentityOperator(space)
   gradient = odl.Gradient(space, method='forward')

where we chose the 'forward' method for the gradient for numerical stability reasons. To create :math:`K`, we note that :math:`K` is a special case of a `BroadcastOperator`, an operator that broadcasts its argument to several sub-operators. Hence we may create :math:`K` by

.. code-block:: python

   K = odl.BroadcastOperator(I, gradient)

We can now proceed to the problem specification. The Chambolle-Pock solver does not take the functionals themselves as arguments, instead it needs the proximal operators associated with them. ODL implements most common functionals such as L1, L2 and Kulback-Leibler distance. If you are interested in writing original proximal operators, see :ref:`proximal_operators` for a mathematical discussion.

In this case, we first create the l2 and l1 discreptancy terms

.. code-block:: python
   
   prox_convconj_l2 = odl.solvers.proximal_convexconjugate_l2(space, g=noisy)
   prox_convconj_l1 = odl.solvers.proximal_convexconjugate_l1(gradient.range, lam=1/30.0)

Note that :math:`\lambda` is actually part of the proximal operator. Finally, we need to combine these, similarly to how we combined operators to form :math:`K`

.. code-block:: python

   proximal_F = odl.solvers.combine_proximals([prox_convconj_l2,
                                               prox_convconj_l1])

We also select the proximal operator corresponding the positivity constraint

.. code-block:: python

   proximal_G = odl.solvers.proximal_nonnegativity(space)

Now that the problem is set up, we need to select some solver parameters. For Chambolle-Pock, there is one main rule that we can use: The product of the primal step :math:`\tau`, the dual step :math:`\sigma` and the squared operator norm :math:`||K||^2` has to be smaller than 1: :math:`\tau \sigma ||K||^2 < 1`. Except for this selecting :math:`\tau` and :math:`\sigma` is down to trial and error. Here we pick them equal:

.. code-block:: python
   
   op_norm = odl.power_method_opnorm(K, 5, xstart=noisy)
   tau = sigma = 1.0 / op_norm

Finally, we pick a starting point and run the algorithm:

.. code-block:: python

   x = K.domain.zero()   

   odl.solvers.chambolle_pock_solver(
       K, x, tau=tau, sigma=sigma, proximal_primal=proximal_G,
       proximal_dual=proximal_F, niter=100)

   orig.show('original')
   noisy.show('noisy')
   x.show('result')

Yielding the following figures:

.. image:: figures/chambolle_pock_original.png

.. image:: figures/chambolle_pock_noisy.png

.. image:: figures/chambolle_pock_result.png
