doc/source/math/resizing_ops.rst, before:

.. _resizing_ops:

##################
Resizing Operators
##################


Introduction
============
Resizing can be described in a continuous as well as in a fully discrete setting. In the
continuous case, resizing corresponds to changing the domain of a function space, and the restriction
and extension operations are well-defined.

However, due to practical reasons, it makes sense to investigate resizing in a discretized setting,
mainly to make it reflect the resizing of an array directly. This means, for example, that in
uniformly discretized spaces, the side lengths of the unit cell are not changed, which implies that
no resampling is performed. In this way, resampling and resizing can be kept separate, with the
possibility to chain them whenever necessary.

Let now :math:`\mathbb{R}^n` with :math:`n \in \mathbb{N}` be the space of one-dimensional real
vectors encoding values of a function defined on an interval :math:`[a, b] \subset \mathbb{R}`.
Since values are not manipulated, the generalization to complex-valued functions is straightforward.
Further, since all operations completely separate with respect to different dimensions, the results
can easily applied to the multi-dimensional case.


Restriction operator
====================
We consider the space :math:`\mathbb{R}^m` for an :math:`m < n \in \mathbb{N}` and define the
restriction operator

.. math::
    R : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad R(x) := (x_p, \dots, x_{p+m-1})
    :label: def_restrict_op

with a given index :math:`0 \leq p \leq n - m - 1`. Its adjoint with respect to the standard inner
product is easy to determine:

.. math::
    \langle R(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
    &= \sum_{j=0}^{m-1} R(x)_j\, y_j
    = \sum_{j=0}^{m-1} x_{p+j}\, y_j
    = \sum_{j=p}^{p+m-1} x_j\, y_{j-p} \\
    &= \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i\, R^*(y)_i

with the zero-padding operator

.. math::
    R^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{i-p} & \text{if } p \leq i \leq p + m - 1, \\
    0       & \text{else.}
    \end{cases}
    :label: zero_pad_as_restr_adj

In practice, this means that a new zero vector of size :math:`n` is created, and the values
:math:`y` are filled in from index :math:`p` onwards. It is also clear that the operator :math:`R`
is right-invertible by :math:`R^*`, i.e. :math:`R R^* = \mathrm{Id}_{\mathbb{R}^m}`. In fact, any
operator of the form :math:`R^* + P`, where :math:`P` is linear and :math:`P(x)_i = 0` for
:math:`i \not \in \{p, \dots, p+m-1\}` acts as a right inverse for :math:`R`. On the other hand,
:math:`R` has no left inverse since it has a non-trivial kernel
:math:`\mathrm{ker} R = \{x \in \mathbb{R}^n\,|\,x_i = 0 \text{ for } i = p, \dots, p+m-1\}`.


Extension operators
===================
Now we study the opposite case of resizing, namely extending a vector. We thus choose :math:`m > n`
and consider different cases of enlarging a given vector :math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^n` to a vector in
:math:`\mathbb{R}^m`. The start index is again denoted by :math:`p` and needs to fulfill
:math:`0 \leq p \leq m - n - 1`, such that a vector of length :math:`n` "fits into" a vector of
length :math:`m` when starting at index :math:`p`.

It should be noted that all extension operators mentioned here are of the above form
:math:`R^* + P` with :math:`P` acting on the "outer" indices only. Hence they all act as a right
inverse for the restriction operator. This property can also be read as the fact that all extension
operators are left-inverted by the restriction operator.


Zero padding
------------
In this most basic padding variant, one fills the missing values in the target vector with zeros,
yielding the operator

.. math::
    E_{\mathrm{z}} : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad E_{\mathrm{z}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{j-p}, & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1, \\
    0      , & \text{else}.
    \end{cases}
    :label: def_zero_pad_op

Note that this is the adjoint of the restriction operator :math:`R` defined in :eq:`def_restrict_op`.
Hence, its adjoint is given by the restriction, :math:`E_{\mathrm{z}}^* = R`.


Constant padding
----------------
In constant padding with constant :math:`c`, the extra zeros in :eq:`def_zero_pad_op` are replaced
with :math:`c`. Hence, the operator performing constant padding can be written as
:math:`E_{\mathrm{c}} = E_{\mathrm{z}} + P_{\mathrm{c}}`, where the second summand is given by

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{c}}(x) =
    \begin{cases}
    0      , & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1, \\
    c      , & \text{else}.
    \end{cases}

Note that this operator is not linear, and its derivative is the zero operator, hence the derivative
of the constant padding operator is :math:`E_{\mathrm{c}}' = E_{\mathrm{z}}`.


Periodic padding
----------------
This padding mode continues the original vector :math:`x` periodically in both directions. For
reasons of practicability, at most one whole copy is allowed on both sides, which means that the
numbers :math:`n`, :math:`m` and :math:`p` need to fulfill :math:`p \leq n` ("left" padding amount)
and :math:`m - (p + n) \leq n` ("right" padding amount). The periodic padding operator is then
defined as

.. math::
    E_{\mathrm{p}} \colon \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad E_{\mathrm{p}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{j-p + n}, & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,     \\
    x_{j-p},     & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1, \\
    x_{j-p - n}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}
    :label: def_per_pad_op

Hence, one can at most get 3 full periods with :math:`m = 3n` and :math:`p = n`. Again, this operator
can be written as :math:`E_{\mathrm{p}} = E_{\mathrm{z}} + P_{\mathrm{p}}` with an operator

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{p}} \colon \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad P_{\mathrm{p}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{j-p + n}, & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,     \\
    0,           & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1, \\
    x_{j-p - n}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}

For the adjoint of :math:`P_{\mathrm{p}}`, we calculate

.. math::
    \langle P_{\mathrm{p}}(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
    &= \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} x_{j-p+n}\, y_j + \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} x_{j-p-n}\, y_j \\
    &= \sum_{i=n-p}^{n-1} x_i\, y_{i+p-n} + \sum_{i=0}^{m-n-p-1} x_i\, y_{i+p+n} \\
    &= \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i\, \big( P_{\mathrm{p},1}^*(y) + P_{\mathrm{p},2}^*(y) \big)

with

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{p},1}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{i+p-n}, & \text{if } n - p \leq i \leq n - 1, \\
    0,         & \text{else},
    \end{cases}

and

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{p},2}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{i+p+n}, & \text{if } 0 \leq i \leq m - n - p - 1, \\
    0,         & \text{else}.
    \end{cases}

In practice, this means that that besides copying the values from the indices :math:`p, \dots, p+n-1`
of a vector :math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^m` to a new vector :math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^n`, some of the values
corresponding to the other indices are added to the vector :math:`x` as follows. The *first*
:math:`m - n - p - 1` entries of :math:`y` (negative means 0) are added to the *last*
:math:`m - n - p - 1` entries of :math:`x`, in the same ascending order. The *last* :math:`p` entries
of :math:`y` are added to the *first* :math:`p` entries of :math:`x`, again keeping the order. This
procedure can be interpreted as "folding back" the periodized structure of :math:`y` into a single
period :math:`x` by adding the values from the two side periods.


Symmetric padding
-----------------
In symmetric padding mode, a given vector is extended by mirroring at the outmost nodes to the
desired extent. By convention, the outmost values are not repeated, and as in periodic mode, the
input vector is re-used at most once on both sides. Since the outmost values are not doubled, the
numbers :math:`n`, :math:`m` and :math:`p` need to fulfill the relations
:math:`p \leq n - 1` ("left" padding amount) and :math:`m - (p + n) \leq n - 1` ("right" padding
amount). Now the symmetric padding operator is defined as

.. math::
    E_{\mathrm{s}} \colon \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad E_{\mathrm{s}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{p-j},      & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    x_{j-p},      & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    x_{2n-2+p-j}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}
    :label: def_sym_pad_op

This operator is the sum of the zero-padding operator :math:`E_{\mathrm{z}}` and

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{s}} \colon \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad P_{\mathrm{s}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{p-j},      & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    0,            & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    x_{2n-2+p-j}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}

For its adjoint, we compute

.. math::
    \langle P_{\mathrm{s}}(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
    &= \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} x_{p-j}\, y_j + \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} x_{2n-2+p-j}\, y_j \\
    &= \sum_{i=1}^p x_i\, y_{p-i} + \sum_{i=2n-1+p-m}^{n-2} x_i\, y_{2n-2+p-i} \\
    &= \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i\, \big( P_{\mathrm{s},1}^*(y) + P_{\mathrm{s},2}^*(y) \big)

with

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{s},1}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{p-i},   & \text{if } 1 \leq i \leq p, \\
    0,         & \text{else},
    \end{cases}

and

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{s},2}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{2n-2+p-i}, & \text{if } 2n - 1 + p - m \leq i \leq n - 2, \\
    0,            & \text{else}.
    \end{cases}

Note that the index condition :math:`m - (p + n) \leq n - 1` is equivalent to
:math:`2n - 1 + p - m \geq 0`, hence the index range in the definition of
:math:`P_{\mathrm{s},2}^*` is well-defined.

Practically, the evaluation of :math:`E_{\mathrm{s}}^*` consists in copying the "main" part of
:math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^m` corresponding to the indices :math:`p, \dots, p + n - 1` to
:math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^n` and updating the vector additively as follows. The values at indices 1 to
:math:`p` are updated with the values of :math:`y` mirrored at the index position :math:`p`, i.e. in
reversed order. The values at the indices :math:`2n - 1 + p - m` to :math:`n - 2` are updated with
the values of :math:`y` mirrored at the position :math:`2n + 2 - p`, again in reversed order. This
procedure can be interpreted as "mirroring back" the outer two parts of the vector :math:`y` at the
indices :math:`p` and :math:`2n + 2 - p`, adding those parts to the "main" vector.


Order 0 padding
---------------
Padding with order 0 consistency means continuing the vector constantly beyond its boundaries, i.e.

.. math::
    E_{\mathrm{o0}} \colon \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad E_{\mathrm{o0}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_0,     & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    x_{j-p}, & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    x_{n-1}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}
    :label: def_order0_pad_op

This operator is the sum of the zero-padding operator and

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{o0}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_0,     & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    0,       & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    x_{n-1}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}

We calculate the adjoint of :math:`P_{\mathrm{o0}}`:

.. math::
 \langle P_{\mathrm{o0}}(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
 &= \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} x_0\, y_j + \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} x_{n-1}\, y_j \\
 &= x_0 \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} y_j + x_{n-1} \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} y_j \\
 &= x_0 M_{\mathrm{l},0}(y) + x_{n-1} M_{\mathrm{r},0}(y)

with the zero'th order moments

.. math::
 M_{\mathrm{l},0}(y) := \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} y_j, \quad M_{\mathrm{r},0}(y) := \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} y_j.

Hence, we get

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{o0}}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    M_{\mathrm{l},0}(y), & \text{if } i = 0,     \\
    M_{\mathrm{r},0}(y), & \text{if } i = n - 1, \\
    0,                   & \text{else},
    \end{cases}

with the convention that the sum of the two values is taken in the case that $n = 1$, i.e. both first
cases are the same. Hence, after constructing the restriction :math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^n` of a vector
:math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^m` to the main part :math:`p, \dots, p + n - 1`, the sum of the entries to
the left are added to :math:`x_0`, and the sum of the entries to the right are added to
:math:`x_{n-1}`.


Order 1 padding
---------------
In this padding mode, a given vector is continued with constant slope instead of constant value, i.e.

.. math::
 E_{\mathrm{o1}} &\colon \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \notag \\
 E_{\mathrm{o1}}(x)_j &:=
 \begin{cases}
  x_0 + (j - p)(x_1 - x_0),                     & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
  x_{j-p},                                      & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
  x_{n-1} + (j - p - n + 1)(x_{n-1} - x_{n-2}), & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
 \end{cases}
 :label: def_order1_pad_op

We can write this operator as :math:`E_{\mathrm{o1}} = E_{\mathrm{o0}} + S_{\mathrm{o1}}` with the
order-1 specific part

.. math::
    S_{\mathrm{o1}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    (j - p)(x_1 - x_0),                 & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    0,                                  & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    (j - p - n + 1)(x_{n-1} - x_{n-2}), & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}

For its adjoint, we get

.. math::
 \langle S_{\mathrm{o1}}(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
 &= \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} (j - p)(x_1 - x_0)\, y_j +
    \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} (j - p - n + 1)(x_{n-1} - x_{n-2})\, y_j \\
 &= x_0 (-M_{\mathrm{l}}(y)) + x_1 M_{\mathrm{l}}(y) +
    x_{n-2}(-M_{\mathrm{r}}(y)) + x_{n-1} M_{\mathrm{r}}(y)

with the first order moments

.. math::
 M_{\mathrm{l},1}(y) := \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} (j - p)\, y_j, \quad
 M_{\mathrm{r},1}(y) := \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} (j - p - n + 1)\, y_j.

Hence, the order-1 specific operator has the adjoint

.. math::
    S_{\mathrm{o1}}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    -M_{\mathrm{l},1}(y), & \text{if } i = 0,     \\
    M_{\mathrm{l},1}(y),  & \text{if } i = 1,     \\
    -M_{\mathrm{r},1}(y), & \text{if } i = n - 2, \\
    M_{\mathrm{r},1}(y),  & \text{if } i = n - 1, \\
    0,                  & \text{else},
    \end{cases}

with the convention of summing values for overlapping cases, i.e. if :math:`i \in \{1, 2\}`. In
practice, the adjoint for the order 1 padding case is applied by computing the zero'th and first
order moments of :math:`y` and adding them to the two outmost entries of :math:`x` according to the
above rule.

Commit message:

DOC: fix some small things in the resizing op doc

doc/source/math/resizing_ops.rst, after:

.. _resizing_ops:

##################
Resizing Operators
##################


Introduction
============
Resizing can be described in a continuous as well as in a fully discrete setting. In the
continuous case, resizing corresponds to changing the domain of a function space, and the restriction
and extension operations are well-defined.

However, due to practical reasons, it makes sense to investigate resizing in a discretized setting,
mainly to make it reflect the resizing of an array directly. This means, for example, that in
uniformly discretized spaces, the side lengths of the unit cell are not changed, which implies that
no resampling is performed. In this way, resampling and resizing can be kept separate, with the
possibility to chain them whenever necessary.

Let now :math:`\mathbb{R}^n` with :math:`n \in \mathbb{N}` be the space of one-dimensional real
vectors encoding values of a function defined on an interval :math:`[a, b] \subset \mathbb{R}`.
Since values are not manipulated, the generalization to complex-valued functions is straightforward.
Further, since all operations completely separate with respect to different dimensions, the results
can easily applied to the multi-dimensional case.


Restriction operator
====================
We consider the space :math:`\mathbb{R}^m` for an :math:`m < n \in \mathbb{N}` and define the
restriction operator

.. math::
    R : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad R(x) := (x_p, \dots, x_{p+m-1})
    :label: def_restrict_op

with a given index :math:`0 \leq p \leq n - m - 1`. Its adjoint with respect to the standard inner
product is easy to determine:

.. math::
    \langle R(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
    &= \sum_{j=0}^{m-1} R(x)_j\, y_j
    = \sum_{j=0}^{m-1} x_{p+j}\, y_j
    = \sum_{j=p}^{p+m-1} x_j\, y_{j-p} \\
    &= \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i\, R^*(y)_i

with the zero-padding operator

.. math::
    R^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{i-p} & \text{if } p \leq i \leq p + m - 1, \\
    0       & \text{else.}
    \end{cases}
    :label: zero_pad_as_restr_adj

In practice, this means that a new zero vector of size :math:`n` is created, and the values
:math:`y` are filled in from index :math:`p` onwards. It is also clear that the operator :math:`R`
is right-invertible by :math:`R^*`, i.e. :math:`R R^* = \mathrm{Id}_{\mathbb{R}^m}`. In fact, any
operator of the form :math:`R^* + P`, where :math:`P` is linear and :math:`P(x)_i = 0` for
:math:`i \not \in \{p, \dots, p+m-1\}` acts as a right inverse for :math:`R`. On the other hand,
:math:`R` has no left inverse since it has a non-trivial kernel
:math:`\mathrm{ker} R = \{x \in \mathbb{R}^n\,|\,x_i = 0 \text{ for } i = p, \dots, p+m-1\}`.


Extension operators
===================
Now we study the opposite case of resizing, namely extending a vector. We thus choose :math:`m > n`
and consider different cases of enlarging a given vector :math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^n` to a vector in
:math:`\mathbb{R}^m`. The start index is again denoted by :math:`p` and needs to fulfill
:math:`0 \leq p \leq m - n - 1`, such that a vector of length :math:`n` "fits into" a vector of
length :math:`m` when starting at index :math:`p`.

It should be noted that all extension operators mentioned here are of the above form
:math:`R^* + P` with :math:`P` acting on the "outer" indices only. Hence they all act as a right
inverses for the restriction operator. This property can also be read as the fact that all extension
operators are left-inverted by the restriction operator :math:`R`.

Moreover, the "mixed" case, i.e. the combination of restriction and extension which would occur e.g.
for a constant index shift :math:`x \mapsto (0, \dots, 0, x_0, \dots, x_{n-p-1})`, is not considered
here. It can be represented by a combination of the two "pure" operations.


Zero padding
------------
In this most basic padding variant, one fills the missing values in the target vector with zeros,
yielding the operator

.. math::
    E_{\mathrm{z}} : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^m, \quad E_{\mathrm{z}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{j-p}, & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1, \\
    0      , & \text{else}.
    \end{cases}
    :label: def_zero_pad_op

Note that this is the adjoint of the restriction operator :math:`R` defined in :eq:`def_restrict_op`.
Hence, its adjoint is given by the restriction, :math:`E_{\mathrm{z}}^* = R`.


Constant padding
----------------
In constant padding with constant :math:`c`, the extra zeros in :eq:`def_zero_pad_op` are replaced
with :math:`c`. Hence, the operator performing constant padding can be written as
:math:`E_{\mathrm{c}} = E_{\mathrm{z}} + P_{\mathrm{c}}`, where the second summand is given by

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{c}}(x) =
    \begin{cases}
    0      , & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1, \\
    c      , & \text{else}.
    \end{cases}

Note that this operator is not linear, and its derivative is the zero operator, hence the derivative
of the constant padding operator is :math:`E_{\mathrm{c}}' = E_{\mathrm{z}}`.


Periodic padding
----------------
This padding mode continues the original vector :math:`x` periodically in both directions. For
reasons of practicability, at most one whole copy is allowed on both sides, which means that the
numbers :math:`n`, :math:`m` and :math:`p` need to fulfill :math:`p \leq n` ("left" padding amount)
and :math:`m - (p + n) \leq n` ("right" padding amount). The periodic padding operator is then
defined as

.. math::
    E_{\mathrm{p}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{j-p + n}, & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,     \\
    x_{j-p},     & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1, \\
    x_{j-p - n}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}
    :label: def_per_pad_op

Hence, one can at most get 3 full periods with :math:`m = 3n` and :math:`p = n`. Again, this operator
can be written as :math:`E_{\mathrm{p}} = E_{\mathrm{z}} + P_{\mathrm{p}}` with an operator

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{p}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{j-p + n}, & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,     \\
    0,           & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1, \\
    x_{j-p - n}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}

For the adjoint of :math:`P_{\mathrm{p}}`, we calculate

.. math::
    \langle P_{\mathrm{p}}(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
    &= \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} x_{j-p+n}\, y_j + \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} x_{j-p-n}\, y_j \\
    &= \sum_{i=n-p}^{n-1} x_i\, y_{i+p-n} + \sum_{i=0}^{m-n-p-1} x_i\, y_{i+p+n} \\
    &= \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i\, \big( P_{\mathrm{p},1}^*(y) + P_{\mathrm{p},2}^*(y) \big)

with

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{p},1}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{i+p-n}, & \text{if } n - p \leq i \leq n - 1, \\
    0,         & \text{else},
    \end{cases}

and

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{p},2}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{i+p+n}, & \text{if } 0 \leq i \leq m - n - p - 1, \\
    0,         & \text{else}.
    \end{cases}

In practice, this means that that besides copying the values from the indices :math:`p, \dots, p+n-1`
of a vector :math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^m` to a new vector :math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^n`, the values
corresponding to the other indices are added to the vector :math:`x` as follows. The *first*
:math:`m - n - p - 1` entries of :math:`y` (negative means 0) are added to the *last*
:math:`m - n - p - 1` entries of :math:`x`, in the same ascending order. The *last* :math:`p` entries
of :math:`y` are added to the *first* :math:`p` entries of :math:`x`, again keeping the order. This
procedure can be interpreted as "folding back" the periodized structure of :math:`y` into a single
period :math:`x` by adding the values from the two side periods.


Symmetric padding
-----------------
In symmetric padding mode, a given vector is extended by mirroring at the outmost nodes to the
desired extent. By convention, the outmost values are not repeated, and as in periodic mode, the
input vector is re-used at most once on both sides. Since the outmost values are not doubled, the
numbers :math:`n`, :math:`m` and :math:`p` need to fulfill the relations
:math:`p \leq n - 1` ("left" padding amount) and :math:`m - (p + n) \leq n - 1` ("right" padding
amount). Now the symmetric padding operator is defined as

.. math::
    E_{\mathrm{s}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{p-j},      & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    x_{j-p},      & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    x_{2n-2+p-j}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}
    :label: def_sym_pad_op

This operator is the sum of the zero-padding operator :math:`E_{\mathrm{z}}` and

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{s}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_{p-j},      & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    0,            & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    x_{2n-2+p-j}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}

For its adjoint, we compute

.. math::
    \langle P_{\mathrm{s}}(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
    &= \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} x_{p-j}\, y_j + \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} x_{2n-2+p-j}\, y_j \\
    &= \sum_{i=1}^p x_i\, y_{p-i} + \sum_{i=2n-1+p-m}^{n-2} x_i\, y_{2n-2+p-i} \\
    &= \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i\, \big( P_{\mathrm{s},1}^*(y) + P_{\mathrm{s},2}^*(y) \big)

with

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{s},1}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{p-i},   & \text{if } 1 \leq i \leq p, \\
    0,         & \text{else},
    \end{cases}

and

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{s},2}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    y_{2n-2+p-i}, & \text{if } 2n - 1 + p - m \leq i \leq n - 2, \\
    0,            & \text{else}.
    \end{cases}

Note that the index condition :math:`m - (p + n) \leq n - 1` is equivalent to
:math:`2n - 1 + p - m \geq 0`, hence the index range in the definition of
:math:`P_{\mathrm{s},2}^*` is well-defined.

Practically, the evaluation of :math:`E_{\mathrm{s}}^*` consists in copying the "main" part of
:math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^m` corresponding to the indices :math:`p, \dots, p + n - 1` to
:math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^n` and updating the vector additively as follows. The values at indices 1 to
:math:`p` are updated with the values of :math:`y` mirrored at the index position :math:`p`, i.e. in
reversed order. The values at the indices :math:`2n - 1 + p - m` to :math:`n - 2` are updated with
the values of :math:`y` mirrored at the position :math:`2n + 2 - p`, again in reversed order. This
procedure can be interpreted as "mirroring back" the outer two parts of the vector :math:`y` at the
indices :math:`p` and :math:`2n + 2 - p`, adding those parts to the "main" vector.


Order 0 padding
---------------
Padding with order 0 consistency means continuing the vector constantly beyond its boundaries, i.e.

.. math::
    E_{\mathrm{o0}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_0,     & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    x_{j-p}, & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    x_{n-1}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}
    :label: def_order0_pad_op

This operator is the sum of the zero-padding operator and

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{o0}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    x_0,     & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    0,       & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    x_{n-1}, & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}

We calculate the adjoint of :math:`P_{\mathrm{o0}}`:

.. math::
 \langle P_{\mathrm{o0}}(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
 &= \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} x_0\, y_j + \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} x_{n-1}\, y_j \\
 &= x_0 \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} y_j + x_{n-1} \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} y_j \\
 &= x_0 M_{\mathrm{l},0}(y) + x_{n-1} M_{\mathrm{r},0}(y)

with the zero'th order moments

.. math::
 M_{\mathrm{l},0}(y) := \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} y_j, \quad M_{\mathrm{r},0}(y) := \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} y_j.

Hence, we get

.. math::
    P_{\mathrm{o0}}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    M_{\mathrm{l},0}(y), & \text{if } i = 0,     \\
    M_{\mathrm{r},0}(y), & \text{if } i = n - 1, \\
    0,                   & \text{else},
    \end{cases}

with the convention that the sum of the two values is taken in the case that $n = 1$, i.e. both first
cases are the same. Hence, after constructing the restriction :math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^n` of a vector
:math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^m` to the main part :math:`p, \dots, p + n - 1`, the sum of the entries to
the left are added to :math:`x_0`, and the sum of the entries to the right are added to
:math:`x_{n-1}`.


Order 1 padding
---------------
In this padding mode, a given vector is continued with constant slope instead of constant value, i.e.

.. math::
 E_{\mathrm{o1}}(x)_j :=
 \begin{cases}
  x_0 + (j - p)(x_1 - x_0),                     & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
  x_{j-p},                                      & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
  x_{n-1} + (j - p - n + 1)(x_{n-1} - x_{n-2}), & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
 \end{cases}
 :label: def_order1_pad_op

We can write this operator as :math:`E_{\mathrm{o1}} = E_{\mathrm{o0}} + S_{\mathrm{o1}}` with the
order-1 specific part

.. math::
    S_{\mathrm{o1}}(x)_j :=
    \begin{cases}
    (j - p)(x_1 - x_0),                 & \text{if } 0 \leq j \leq p - 1,      \\
    0,                                  & \text{if } p \leq j \leq p + n - 1,  \\
    (j - p - n + 1)(x_{n-1} - x_{n-2}), & \text{if } p + n \leq j \leq m - 1.
    \end{cases}

For its adjoint, we get

.. math::
 \langle S_{\mathrm{o1}}(x), y \rangle_{\mathbb{R}^m}
 &= \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} (j - p)(x_1 - x_0)\, y_j +
    \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} (j - p - n + 1)(x_{n-1} - x_{n-2})\, y_j \\
 &= x_0 (-M_{\mathrm{l}}(y)) + x_1 M_{\mathrm{l}}(y) +
    x_{n-2}(-M_{\mathrm{r}}(y)) + x_{n-1} M_{\mathrm{r}}(y)

with the first order moments

.. math::
 M_{\mathrm{l},1}(y) := \sum_{j=0}^{p-1} (j - p)\, y_j, \quad
 M_{\mathrm{r},1}(y) := \sum_{j=p+n}^{m-1} (j - p - n + 1)\, y_j.

Hence, the order-1 specific operator has the adjoint

.. math::
    S_{\mathrm{o1}}^*(y)_i :=
    \begin{cases}
    -M_{\mathrm{l},1}(y), & \text{if } i = 0,     \\
    M_{\mathrm{l},1}(y),  & \text{if } i = 1,     \\
    -M_{\mathrm{r},1}(y), & \text{if } i = n - 2, \\
    M_{\mathrm{r},1}(y),  & \text{if } i = n - 1, \\
    0,                  & \text{else},
    \end{cases}

with the convention of summing values for overlapping cases, i.e. if :math:`i \in \{1, 2\}`. In
practice, the adjoint for the order 1 padding case is applied by computing the zero'th and first
order moments of :math:`y` and adding them to the two outmost entries of :math:`x` according to the
above rule.
